Nutrition and Diabetes | ADA 5) ? true : false; " > Skip to Main content Diabetes Food Hub For Professionals English Change Site Language: English (en) Español (es) Online Store Account keywords Search Donate Donate Monthly Open main menu About Diabetes About Diabetes Warning Signs and Symptoms Prediabetes Diabetes Prevention Type 1 Type 2 Gestational Diabetes bold Understanding A1C Diabetes Complications Devices &amp; Technology Vaccinations Common Terms Diabetes Statistics More About Diabetes Take Our Type 2 Risk Test Learn your risk for type 2 and take steps to prevent it Know Your Facts Learn the ins and outs of diabetes and steps for better care Obesity Care and Beyond Obesity care is as unique as you are. Discover the different treatment and prevention options. bold Life with Diabetes Life with Diabetes Newly Diagnosed Living with Type 1 Living with Type 2 Treatment &amp; Care Hypoglycemia (Low Blood Glucose) Personal Stories bold Youth and Family Corner Traveling Getting Sick Diabetes at School Learn what you can do to keep your child with diabetes safe at school Pregnancy What you need to know about gestational diabetes Sick Days Make a plan to be prepared when illness strikes bold Health &amp; Wellness Health &amp; Wellness Fitness Weight Management Medications Substance Use bold Diabetes &amp; Your Health Eye Health Foot Health Heart Health Kidney Health Mental Health Oral Health Sexual Health bold BMI Calculator Healthy Living eNewsletter Sign up to receive timely information on topics to help you and your family live a healthy life Better Choices for Life Bringing ADA's evidence-based guidelines and perspective directly to you in the store so you can make informed choices. bold Food &amp; Nutrition Nutrition Tips Healthy Eating Tips Reading Food Labels Food Security Live Cooking Classes Recipes from Diabetes Food Hub® bold Diabetes Nutrition Basics Food &amp; Blood Glucose Food &amp; Carbs Meal Planning bold Diabetes Food Hub® Meal Patterns Live Cooking Classes bold Tools &amp; Resources Tools &amp; Resources For Caregivers Find a Diabetes Education Program Guide for People with Type 2 Diabetes Driver&#039;s License Information Tests &amp; Calculators Consumer Guide State of Diabetes Toolkit Shop Diabetes Crisis Resources Mental Health Provider Directory bold Managing Health Care Costs Insulin Cost and Affordability Health Insurance Aid Get Connected 85th Anniversary Attend Events Explore Camp Find Your Local Chapter Ask the Experts bold bold Type 2 Diabetes Risk Test Take the 60-second test to find out your risk Recursos en Español Program &amp; Services Directory Find help and resources in your zip code bold Ways to Contribute Ways to Contribute Volunteer Fundraise Become a Supplier Learn About Clinical Trials bold Ways to Give Monthly Giving In-Honor Gift Memorial Gift Vehicle Donation Real Estate Donation Donations by Mail/Phone Workplace Giving / Matching Gifts Planned Giving IRA/Retirement Giving Society Donor-Advised Funds bold Programs and Initiatives Diabetes Prevention Program Project Power bold Give Today Choose between a one-time donation or recurring monthly gifts. Find Your Local Chapter Reach out and get involved in programs and events near you. Donate a Vehicle We make vehicle donations easy so you can help fuel our fight, hassle-free.&nbsp; bold Advocacy Advocacy Raise Your Voice: Engagement Platform Federal Advocacy State Advocacy Grassroots Advocacy Become an Advocate Regional Advocacy Councils Know Your Rights Employment Discrimination Safe at School® Resources for Lawyers bold bold Advocacy Initiatives Amputation Prevention Alliance Continuous Glucose Monitors (CGMs) Obesity bold Become an Advocate Commitment to Health Care Access Diabetes Advocacy Stories Blog bold Diabetes Food Hub For Professionals English Change Site Language: English (en) Español (es) Online Store Account Breadcrumb Home How To Eat Healthy main content start Food &amp; Nutrition How to Eat Healthy What does it mean to eat healthy? The answer is a little different for everybody, but it’s a delicious journey to find out what works best for you. Here’s where you can start to navigate nutrition and the science-backed facts about food.&nbsp; Image Healthy Eating Can Be Delicious! Healthy eating for prediabetes and diabetes not only helps to manage your blood glucose (blood sugar), but it also helps you have a better relationship with food. Intentional food choices like eating more non-starchy veggies, opting for lean meats or plant-based proteins, choosing quality carbohydrates, and low-fat versions of cheeses and dressings, will all help you meet your health goals—and they’ll taste great too! It is not about one food, or one meal, it’s about healthy eating over time. Food nourishes you so you stay healthy, but our food choices are also impacted by our memories, culture, and community&nbsp; Food &amp; Nutrition Healthy Eating Tips From healthy swaps and how to shop the grocery store, to new recipes and eating well in a fast food restaurant, we've got the tips you need to set yourself up for nutritious success. Fast-Food Dining Shopping the Grocery Store Get the Tips Image Food &amp; Nutrition How Food Affects Blood Glucose All foods affect your blood glucose (blood sugar), but some have a bigger impact than others, such as foods high in simple carbs, fat, and calories. Find out how to plan your meals to help manage your blood glucose. Meal Planning Understanding Carbs Find Out More Image FOOD &amp; NUTRITION How to Read Food Labels Figuring out the Nutrition Facts label on food can be tricky—that's why we have a breakdown of what it all means and how you can use the food label to make healthier choices.&nbsp; Learn How Image FOOD &amp; NUTRITION Food Assistance Resources Did you know? Many Americans face food insecurity, which means they don't have reliable or consistent access to healthy foods. If that's you, we have resources that can help. Find Resources Image FOOD &amp; NUTRITION Free Live Cooking Classes The American Diabetes Association has partnered with the chefs at Homemade to provide a free live cooking class every month so you can learn to make tasty, healthy meals at home. And our nutrition experts will be standing by to answer your questions! &nbsp; Register for a Class Image FOOD &amp; NUTRITION Tasty Recipes at Your Fingertips Diabetes Food Hub® is your go-to destination for free diabetes-friendly recipes. Search for recipes for every meal (even snacks and desserts!) and for almost every cuisine type and dietary restriction. Plus, use the meal planner and grocery store list maker to simplify your routine.&nbsp; Get Cooking Image Healthy Living Tips in Your Inbox Sign up today for the monthly Healthy Living eNewsletter to receive seasonal recipes and information about fitness, nutrition, self-care, blood glucose management, and more. Count Me In! Give Today and Change lives! With your support, the American Diabetes Association® can continue our lifesaving work to make breakthroughs in research and provide people with the resources they need to fight diabetes. Give Today American Diabetes Association 2451 Crystal Drive, Suite 900 Arlington, VA 22202 For donations by mail: P.O. Box 7023&nbsp; Merrifield, VA 22116-7023 Call, Email, Chat: Center for Information Monday to Friday 9:00 AM–5:30 PM ET [email&#160;protected] 1-800-DIABETES (800-342-2383) About Us Who We Are Annual Reports Board of Directors Executive Team 85 Years of Impact Supporting Partners Research Careers Newsroom Supplier Portal Ways to Contribute Volunteer Fundraise Ways to Give Find Your Local Chapter Learn About Clinical Trials Programs and Initiatives More ADA Sites DiabetesFoodHub.org ShopDiabetes.org Professional.Diabetes.org ConsumerGuide.Diabetes.org Categories About Diabetes Life with Diabetes Health &amp; Wellness Food &amp; Nutrition Tools &amp; Resources Advocacy Sponsors Image Image Image Image Sitemap Policies Privacy Policy How to Reference Our Site Scam Alert Mailing List Removal Terms of Use Copyright 1995–2026. American Diabetes Association®. All rights reserved.