Diabetes Meal Patterns: Science-Based Nutrition Plans for Weight Loss &amp; Management 5) ? true : false; " > Skip to Main content Diabetes Food Hub For Professionals English Change Site Language: English (en) Español (es) Online Store Account keywords Search Donate Donate Monthly Open main menu About Diabetes About Diabetes Warning Signs and Symptoms Prediabetes Diabetes Prevention Type 1 Type 2 Gestational Diabetes bold Understanding A1C Diabetes Complications Devices &amp; Technology Vaccinations Common Terms Diabetes Statistics More About Diabetes Take Our Type 2 Risk Test Learn your risk for type 2 and take steps to prevent it Know Your Facts Learn the ins and outs of diabetes and steps for better care Obesity Care and Beyond Obesity care is as unique as you are. Discover the different treatment and prevention options. bold Life with Diabetes Life with Diabetes Newly Diagnosed Living with Type 1 Living with Type 2 Treatment &amp; Care Hypoglycemia (Low Blood Glucose) Personal Stories bold Youth and Family Corner Traveling Getting Sick Diabetes at School Learn what you can do to keep your child with diabetes safe at school Pregnancy What you need to know about gestational diabetes Sick Days Make a plan to be prepared when illness strikes bold Health &amp; Wellness Health &amp; Wellness Fitness Weight Management Medications Substance Use bold Diabetes &amp; Your Health Eye Health Foot Health Heart Health Kidney Health Mental Health Oral Health Sexual Health bold BMI Calculator Healthy Living eNewsletter Sign up to receive timely information on topics to help you and your family live a healthy life Better Choices for Life Bringing ADA's evidence-based guidelines and perspective directly to you in the store so you can make informed choices. bold Food &amp; Nutrition Nutrition Tips Healthy Eating Tips Reading Food Labels Food Security Live Cooking Classes Recipes from Diabetes Food Hub® bold Diabetes Nutrition Basics Food &amp; Blood Glucose Food &amp; Carbs Meal Planning bold Diabetes Food Hub® Meal Patterns Live Cooking Classes bold Tools &amp; Resources Tools &amp; Resources For Caregivers Find a Diabetes Education Program Guide for People with Type 2 Diabetes Driver&#039;s License Information Tests &amp; Calculators Consumer Guide State of Diabetes Toolkit Shop Diabetes Crisis Resources Mental Health Provider Directory bold Managing Health Care Costs Insulin Cost and Affordability Health Insurance Aid Get Connected 85th Anniversary Attend Events Explore Camp Find Your Local Chapter Ask the Experts bold bold Type 2 Diabetes Risk Test Take the 60-second test to find out your risk Recursos en Español Program &amp; Services Directory Find help and resources in your zip code bold Ways to Contribute Ways to Contribute Volunteer Fundraise Become a Supplier Learn About Clinical Trials bold Ways to Give Monthly Giving In-Honor Gift Memorial Gift Vehicle Donation Real Estate Donation Donations by Mail/Phone Workplace Giving / Matching Gifts Planned Giving IRA/Retirement Giving Society Donor-Advised Funds bold Programs and Initiatives Diabetes Prevention Program Project Power bold Give Today Choose between a one-time donation or recurring monthly gifts. Find Your Local Chapter Reach out and get involved in programs and events near you. Donate a Vehicle We make vehicle donations easy so you can help fuel our fight, hassle-free.&nbsp; bold Advocacy Advocacy Raise Your Voice: Engagement Platform Federal Advocacy State Advocacy Grassroots Advocacy Become an Advocate Regional Advocacy Councils Know Your Rights Employment Discrimination Safe at School® Resources for Lawyers bold bold Advocacy Initiatives Amputation Prevention Alliance Continuous Glucose Monitors (CGMs) Obesity bold Become an Advocate Commitment to Health Care Access Diabetes Advocacy Stories Blog bold Diabetes Food Hub For Professionals English Change Site Language: English (en) Español (es) Online Store Account Breadcrumb Home How To Eat Healthy Eating For Diabetes Management main content start Food &amp; Nutrition Eating for Diabetes Management Informed food choices are essential to living well. Image Have you heard that knowledge is power? This is true for eating healthy, too. Learning about meal patterns that have been proven to help manage diabetes will improve your wellbeing. Using meal patterns as a guide to create an eating plan is the first step in your diabetes journey. Science-Based Nutrition Recommendations Every year, the American Diabetes Association (ADA) publishes our Standards of Care in Diabetes (Standards of Care) . The Standards of Care is a set of practice guidelines based on the latest scientific research and clinical trials. These guidelines are used by health care professionals to treat diabetes and its related health conditions. &nbsp; Every five years, a group of experts come together for an in-depth review of the nutrition guidelines in the Standards of Care. The result of this review is called the Nutrition Consensus Report. This is the foundation for the ADA’s recommendations for nutrition. &nbsp; The Nutrition Consensus Report identifies nutrition strategies that have been shown to help people reach or stay at their blood glucose (blood sugar) targets, reach weight management goals, and low risk for health conditions related to diabetes. The nutrition recommendations highlight that eating plans should be based on the needs of each person. Your own eating plan will be based on your own needs and preferences. The current report outlines seven key meal patterns that have been shown to help manage diabetes. Work with your health care team to decide which meal pattern works best for you. What is the best eating plan for diabetes? “Diet” is a tricky word that can carry a lot of emotional baggage for some people. This four-letter word can trigger a lot of stressful thoughts and is often thought of as a more of a short-term approach to eating. Instead, health care professionals prefer to use terms like “meal” or “eating plans” and “meal patterns” to talk about when, what, and how much we eat to help offer a more long-term approach that can lead to reaching goals. The short answer is that there isn’t one eating plan that prevents or manages diabetes that anyone can use. There are millions of people living with diabetes, and when you consider cultural backgrounds, personal preferences, other health conditions they may have, and elements like costs of food, living situations, and access to healthy foods—there are too many factors for a single approach to nutrition that will work for everyone. &nbsp; The ADA focuses on meal patterns that are scientifically proven to help manage diabetes. These meal patterns are meant to be a way of eating that lasts and works with your needs and preferences. While fad diets may help you to lose weight quickly, it’s more important to focus on food choices you will want to stick with over time and that you can integrate into your lifestyle for long-lasting results. &nbsp; Meal Patterns for Diabetes Management A big part of managing diabetes is a healthy lifestyle, including what you eat. When considering what meal plan will work best for you, consider the types of foods you like to eat, the time you have to prepare food, your budget, and your family’s dietary needs. Consult with your health care team about what meal pattern might work well for you based on your particular health needs and goals. &nbsp; Mediterranean-Style Meal Pattern This pattern is great for people who are looking to reduce their risk of diabetes, reduce their A1C, lower their triglycerides, or reduce their risk of cardiovascular events. &nbsp; Mediterranean-style meal pattern highlights: Plant-based foods (vegetables, beans, nuts and seeds, fruits, and whole grains) Fish and other seafood Olive oil as the main source of dietary fat Dairy products (mainly yogurt and cheese) in low to moderate amounts Fewer than four eggs/week Red meat in low frequency and amounts Wine in low to moderate amounts Concentrated sugars or honey rarely&nbsp; Get the recipe: Baked fish filets with thyme-Dijon topping Image Vegetarian or Vegan Meal Patterns For people who are looking to reduce their risk of diabetes, reduce their A1C, achieve weight loss, or reduce their LDL and non-HDL cholesterol values, one of these patterns would be a good choice. &nbsp; Vegetarian or vegetarian meal pattern highlights: Plant-based foods Excludes all animal-based products (vegan) Excludes meats, seafood, or poultry but includes eggs and/or dairy products (vegetarian) Get the recipe: Eggplant and chickpea stew Image Low-Fat Meal Pattern The low-fat meal pattern is great for people who are looking to reduce their risk of diabetes or lose weight. Low-fat meal pattern highlights: Vegetables Fruits Carbohydrates (e.g., breads/crackers, pasta, whole grains, starchy vegetables) Lean protein sources (including beans) Low-fat dairy products In this review of the nutrition consensus, it was defined as total fat intake less than 30% of total calories and saturated fat intake less than 10%.&nbsp; Get the recipes: Grilled honey-lime chicken and Crispy baked broccoli &nbsp; Image Very Low-Fat Meal Pattern For people who are looking to lose weight or reduce their blood pressure, this meal pattern might be a good choice. Very low-fat meal pattern highlights: Fiber-rich vegetables Beans Fruits Whole grains Non-fat dairy Fish Egg whites This pattern comprises 70–77% carbohydrate (including 30–60g fiber) and less than 10% total calories from fat.&nbsp; Image Low Carbohydrate Meal Pattern This pattern is great for people who are looking to reduce their A1C, achieve weight loss, lower their blood pressure, lower triglycerides, or increase HDL cholesterol. Low-carb meal pattern highlights: Non-starchy vegetables &nbsp; Healthy fats Protein in the form of meat, poultry, fish, shellfish, eggs, cheese, nuts, and seeds Quality carbohydrates are included but limited &nbsp; In this review, a low-carbohydrate eating pattern is defined as reducing carbohydrates to 26–45% of total calories.&nbsp; Get the recipe: Pesto chicken kebabs Image Very Low Carbohydrate Meal Pattern For people who are looking to reduce their A1C, achieve weight loss, lower their blood pressure, lower triglycerides, or increase HDL cholesterol, this pattern might be a good choice. This meal pattern is similar to the low-carbohydrate pattern but further limits carbohydrate-containing foods. Meals typically contain more than half of calories from fat. This pattern often has a goal of 20–50g of non-fiber carbohydrate per day. In this review, a very low-carbohydrate eating pattern is defined as reducing carbohydrate to less than 26% of total calories.&nbsp; Get the recipe: Low-carb artichoke chicken wraps Image Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) Meal Pattern This pattern is great for people who are looking to reduce their risk of diabetes, lose weight, or lower their blood pressure. DASH meal pattern highlights: &nbsp; Vegetables Fruits Low-fat dairy products Whole grains Poultry Fish Nuts Reduced saturated fat, red meat, sweets, and sugar-containing beverages May also be reduced in sodium&nbsp; Get the recipe: Chickpea pasta with roasted vegetables and side salad with balsamic vinaigrette Image Using the Diabetes Plate with Meal Patterns The Diabetes Plate can be a framework for all the above meal patterns, but is currently a visual way to create a meal following the low-carbohydrate meal pattern. By using the specific strategies outlined in each of the meal patterns, the Diabetes Plate can be changed to become a visual tool for any eating occasion. &nbsp; When you live with diabetes or prediabetes or have diabetes-related complications like heart or kidney disease, informed food choices are essential to managing your health. Work with your health care team to find the best meal pattern and management strategies that work for you. If you respond best to carbohydrate counting or limit certain foods that have more of an impact on your blood glucose (blood sugar), these are all ways you can master your diabetes management. Find what works best for you!&nbsp; Learn More About Food Groups Read More Image Non-Starchy Vegetables Vegetables are full of vitamins, minerals,&nbsp;fiber&nbsp;and phytochemicals—and with so few calories and&nbsp;carbohydrate, everyone can enjoy more! Learn about this amazing food group.&nbsp; Read More Read More Image Protein Foods high in protein such as fish, chicken, meats, soy products&nbsp;and cheese, are all called “protein&nbsp;foods.” Some are higher in fat and calories, find out which ones are lean.&nbsp; Read More Read More Image Fruit Fruit contains&nbsp;carbohydrate&nbsp;so you need to count it as part of your meal plan. Get tips on fitting fruit into your diabetes eating plan.&nbsp; Read More Read More Image Fats Another important nutrient to consider as part of a balanced diet is fat. Even though it sounds counter intuitive to what you might expect, eating the right amount of the right type of fat plays an im Read More Read More Image Eating for Diabetes Management Discover science-based nutrition &nbsp;recommendations on how to eat for diabetes management.&nbsp; Read More Read More Image Diabetes Superstar Foods Our list of "superstar" foods are rich in protein, healthy fats, vitamins, minerals, antioxidants, and fiber. Check out our picks!&nbsp; Read More Give Today and Change lives! With your support, the American Diabetes Association® can continue our lifesaving work to make breakthroughs in research and provide people with the resources they need to fight diabetes. Give Today Advertisement x American Diabetes Association 2451 Crystal Drive, Suite 900 Arlington, VA 22202 For donations by mail: P.O. Box 7023&nbsp; Merrifield, VA 22116-7023 Call, Email, Chat: Center for Information Monday to Friday 9:00 AM–5:30 PM ET [email&#160;protected] 1-800-DIABETES (800-342-2383) About Us Who We Are Annual Reports Board of Directors Executive Team 85 Years of Impact Supporting Partners Research Careers Newsroom Supplier Portal Ways to Contribute Volunteer Fundraise Ways to Give Find Your Local Chapter Learn About Clinical Trials Programs and Initiatives More ADA Sites DiabetesFoodHub.org ShopDiabetes.org Professional.Diabetes.org ConsumerGuide.Diabetes.org Categories About Diabetes Life with Diabetes Health &amp; Wellness Food &amp; Nutrition Tools &amp; Resources Advocacy Sponsors Image Image Image Image Sitemap Policies Privacy Policy How to Reference Our Site Scam Alert Mailing List Removal Terms of Use Copyright 1995–2026. American Diabetes Association®. All rights reserved.